---
layout: blog
title: shouhai theory
---

<header>
  <h2>{{ page.title }}</h2>
</header>

I haven't seen any theory out there for shouhai. For context, shouhai is a riichi game mode where you start out with one less tile, so you are playing with a 12-tile hand. In return, you get an invisible "joker" tile as your 13th tile that you can use to complete a regular 14-tile hand.

Because the goal can be considered as "getting to tenpai", shouhai theory is essentially iishanten wait analysis. That is, your final waits in shouhai are those going from iishanten to tenpai. We will classify and analyze all the iishanten types, of which there are four:

- Five pairs
- Twelve orphans
- Two completed groups (2-mentsu)
- Three completed groups (3-mentsu)

### Five pairs

Chiitoitsu is really simple. You win as soon as you get 6 pairs (plus a floating tile, which your joker tile completes as the 7th pair). So tenpai is really getting five pairs, with two floating tiles serving as your tanki waits.

Five pair iishanten is 6 outs, 3 for each tanki pair. There is nothing else to say for now, but we will come back to five pair hands at the end.

### Twelve orphans

Twelve orphans is similar, and much easier to achieve, since even if all four of a tile have been dealt you only need 12 of the thirteen terminal/honors.

To get twelve orphans iishanten with your 12 tiles, you either need 12 unique terminal/honors, or 11 unique terminal/honors with one of them being a pair. It's the same as regular riichi, you just need one less tile, so you probably want to go for it much more often than usual.

With the two irregular hands out of the way, we move on to the standard hand theory.

### Two completed groups (2-mentsu)

When you have two completed groups (__2-mentsu__), you have six tiles remaining that make up your wait. There is essentially only one way to arrange the six tiles in order to achieve iishanten:

- One pair and two simple shapes, like {% mahjong 77z 45p 89s %}

Here a __simple shape__ is a two-tile shape, either ryanmen {% mahjong 45p %}, penchan {% mahjong 12m %}, kanchan {% mahjong 57s %}, or a pair {% mahjong 22z %}. If one of your two simple shapes is a pair, then both (or all 3) pairs contribute to the wait as a shanpon wait.

Unlike tenpai waits, with iishanten you get _two_ shapes to wait on. Assume your pair is {% mahjong 77z %}. So if you have {% mahjong 45p %} and {% mahjong 89s %}, you're waiting on {% mahjong 36p7s %} (12 outs). If you have {% mahjong 45p %} and {% mahjong 88s %}, you're waiting on {% mahjong 36p8s7z %} (12 outs). If you have {% mahjong 44p %} and {% mahjong 88s %}, you're waiting on {% mahjong 4p8s7z %} (6 outs). Yeah, try not to have 3 pairs.

Note that your completed groups can extend your waits if they overlap one of your waits. That is, if {% mahjong 4p %} is one of your waits, then having {% mahjong 234p %} extends that wait to {% mahjong 1p %}, and having {% mahjong 456p %} extends that wait to {% mahjong 7p %}. For 2-mentsu iishanten, this is only relevant when extending ryanmen {% mahjong 34p %} to sanmenchan {% mahjong 34567p %}, or extending shanpon {% mahjong 44s77z %} to entotsu {% mahjong 44456s77z %}. So it's enough to just notice that you have sanmenchan or entotsu when you do, and otherwise you can completely ignore the two existing groups.

In summary, to maximize the wait of your iishanten when you have two completed groups, maximize the wait of your two simple shapes.

### Three completed groups (3-mentsu)

With three completed groups (__3-mentsu__), that leaves only three tiles to make up your wait. Even though it's half as many tiles, the theory is much more complex. There are three ways to arrange the three tiles to achieve iishanten:

- A simple shape and a floating tile, like {% mahjong 34s1z %}
- A ryankan, like {% mahjong 357p %}
- One pair and a floating tile, like {% mahjong 22m7p %}

I'm going to call these three arrangements __headless__, __ryankan__, and __sticky__.

__Headless__ has a pretty simple wait: it waits on the simple shape, and the floating tile serves as a tanki wait. So {% mahjong 34s1z %} waits on {% mahjong 25s1z %} (11 outs). The fact that you have an extra flexible tanki wait is pretty good since you can easily wait on a wind tile, for instance.

__Ryankan__ is when the floating tile adds onto one of the simple shape to make a 3-tile complex shape, further adding tiles to the wait. Actually, this can be in one of two forms:

- __Ryankan__: It extends a kanchan from e.g. {% mahjong 35p %} to {% mahjong 357p %}. This acts as a second kanchan, waiting on {% mahjong 46p %}. In addition, the {% mahjong 37p %} both serve as tanki waits, so this adds {% mahjong 37p %} to the wait, for a total wait of {% mahjong 3467p %} (14 outs).
- __Paired simple shape__: It simply duplicates one of the tiles in a simple shape, like {% mahjong 89s %} becoming {% mahjong 889s %}. Now you're waiting shanpon on {% mahjong 8s %} and tanki on {% mahjong 9s %}, so this adds {% mahjong 89s %} to your wait, for a total wait of {% mahjong 789s %} (10 outs). We'll see why we ignore this case in a second.

__Sticky__ is possibly the best one. If you have {% mahjong 22m7p %}, then not only are you waiting on the pair {% mahjong 2m %} and tanki on {% mahjong 7p %}, you're also waiting to turn {% mahjong 7p %} into any simple shape, so add {% mahjong 5689p %} to your wait. (This is called a taatsu wait, and we consider {% mahjong 7p %} a __sticky tile__.) Overall you are waiting on {% mahjong 2m56789p %} (21 outs). It's really good.

Note that the paired simple shape case is completely subsumed by the sticky case. A paired simple shape waits on the same waits as the sticky tile, except it waits on two less tiles since your pair is always one of the waits. So you can simply consider the paired simple shape case as a worse sticky iishanten.

(Aside: In standard riichi iishanten theory there is a distinction between headless hands with a closed triplet (ankou) vs without a closed triplet, because of how it affects your tenpai wait. In shouhai we don't care at all about the potential tenpai wait since we win with _any_ tenpai, so we ignore this distinction entirely.)

Like in the previous 2-mentsu case, our three (!) completed groups can be used to extend our existing waits. It turns out that due to our waits no longer being just simple shapes, the extension theory is much more complex here, and it's not enough to just look out for sanmenchan {% mahjong 34567p %} and entotsu {% mahjong 44456s77z %}. We'll see why in a moment.

### Choosing between 2- and 3-mentsu

Consider the following shouhai hand: {% mahjong 234567m3367p23s 3p %}

{% mahjong 3p %} is not one of our outs, but it upgrades the 2-mentsu iishanten into a 3-mentsu. Let's compare the waits. Our original {% mahjong 234567m3367p23s %} is waiting on {% mahjong 58p14s %} (16 outs). If we convert by dropping one of {% mahjong 67p23s %}, say {% mahjong 3s %}, we get {% mahjong 234567m33367p2s %} waiting on {% mahjong 58p2s %} (11 outs). Plus we lose our pinfu chances. Seems much worse, right?

This is generally true, but everything changes when extended shapes come into play.

### Extending 3-mentsu

While 3-mentsu iishanten is not much more powerful than 2-mentsu iishanten (assuming ryanmen simple shapes), the strength of 3-mentsu comes from a richer extension theory.

With 2-mentsu, we only had simple waits to consider: ryanmen, kanchan, penchan, and shanpon. These can only be extended by sequences, and some of them are not very interesting:

- Penchan {% mahjong 12m %} extended by {% mahjong 345m %}: you get {% mahjong 12345m %}, which is __ryanmen__ ({% mahjong 45m %})
- Kanchan {% mahjong 46s %} extended by {% mahjong 567s %}: you get {% mahjong 45667s %}, which is __ryanmen__ ({% mahjong 67s %})
- Ryanmen {% mahjong 45p %} extended by {% mahjong 678p %}: you get {% mahjong 45678p %}, which is __sanmenchan__
- Shanpon {% mahjong 44s77z %} extended by {% mahjong 456s %}: you get {% mahjong 44456s77z %}, which is __entotsu__

So for 2-mentsu you only have to look out for sanmenchan and entotsu, as discussed earlier.

With 3-mentsu, we introduce the following non-simple waits:

- Tanki waits: {% mahjong 4p %} waiting on {% mahjong 4p %}
- Taatsu waits: {% mahjong 4p %} waiting on {% mahjong 23456p %}

Let's start with tanki waits. Both headless and ryankan iishanten feature tanki waits. Tanki waits can be extended by sequences two ways, and by triplets two ways. We have:

- Tanki {% mahjong 4p %} extended by sequence {% mahjong 456p %}: you get {% mahjong 4456p %}, which is __aryanmen__ waiting on {% mahjong 47p %}
- Tanki {% mahjong 4p %} extended by sequence {% mahjong 567p %}: you get {% mahjong 4567p %}, which is __nobetan__ waiting on {% mahjong 47p %}
- Tanki {% mahjong 4p %} extended by triplet {% mahjong 555p %}: you get {% mahjong 4555p %}, which is __ryantan__ waiting on {% mahjong 346p %}
- Tanki {% mahjong 4p %} extended by triplet {% mahjong 666p %}: you get {% mahjong 4666p %}, which is __kantan__ waiting on {% mahjong 45p %}

Since headless and ryankan both feature tanki waits, it is easy to extend them. In particular, headless is easy to extend, because if your tanki tile is not near a completed group, it takes only one draw/discard to swap it for one near a completed group.

Sticky iishanten, on the other hand, features a taatsu wait. Taatsu waits are extended by sequences:

- Sticky {% mahjong 4p %} extended by sequence {% mahjong 678p %}: you get {% mahjong 4678p %}, adding {% mahjong 9p %} to the wait.
- Sticky {% mahjong 4p %} extended by sequence {% mahjong 567p %}: you get {% mahjong 4567p %}, __nobetan__. {% mahjong 4p %} and {% mahjong 7p %} are both sticky tiles now, adding {% mahjong 789p %} to the wait.
- Sticky {% mahjong 4p %} extended by sequence {% mahjong 456p %}: you get {% mahjong 4456p %}, __aryanmen__, adding {% mahjong 7p %} to the wait.

This means any of the 6 tiles around a sequence are good candidates for a sticky tile. In 3-mentsu you potentially have 3 sequences, so you have at maximum a 18/34 chance that your sticky tile is extended. And if not, like tanki waits it's just one draw/discard to swap out a sticky tile, and chances are that you're getting something near a sequence. It's not unusual for a sticky wait to wait on most of a suit. For example, {% mahjong 2344678s %} waits on {% mahjong 23456s %} + {% mahjong 1s %} + {% mahjong 9s %}.

Because of the upgrade potential, it is seriously worth considering taking a 3-mentsu iishanten over 2-mentsu, even if it means breaking ryanmen.

### Hybridizing with 5-pair iishanten

There is a little more to say about the 5-pair iishanten. In standard riichi, you usually consider going for chiitoitsu if you have 4 or more pairs. In shouhai, this number obviously decreases to 3 or more pairs, which is much easier to get, even though the 5-pair iishanten is one of the worst, with only 6 outs. However because of the potential for 5-pair iishanten, it is worth considering certain shapes that are often overlooked in standard riichi.

Let's start off with __iipeikou__, which is the strongest shape in this category. If you're in 2-mentsu iishanten, and your two complete groups are iipeikou {% mahjong 334455p %}, you can easily hybridize 2-mentsu iishanten and 5-pair iishanten. For example, {% mahjong 334455p2355s77z %} waits on the standard {% mahjong 145s7z %}, but since it is also a 5-pair hand, you are also waiting on {% mahjong 23s %}. That gives a total wait on {% mahjong 12345s7z %} (18 outs). Pretty good!

Two more common shapes are __tobi-toitsu__ {% mahjong 4466p %} and __narabi-toitsu__ {% mahjong 4455s %}. If you have this plus another pair, it's time to consider 5-pair iishanten. In addition, if you do get into 2-mentsu iishanten with this as your two simple shapes, it is not so bad since they serve as both a shanpon and as a kanchan or ryanmen wait. Tobi-toitsu waits on {% mahjong 456p7z %} (12 outs) and narabi-toitsu on {% mahjong 3456s7z %} (14 outs). Obviously these are not as good as two ryanmen (16 outs) but you take what you can get, so look out for them.

There is also __double aryanmen__ {% mahjong 334566s %}. In standard riichi, this shape is good in iishanten since it waits on {% mahjong 36s %} and upgrades into ryanmen with {% mahjong 2457s %}. In shouhai, we can consider this as part of a sticky iishanten where the sticky tiles are {% mahjong 3s %} and {% mahjong 6s %}, so it wholesale waits on {% mahjong 12345678s %}, just like the nobetan {% mahjong 3456s %}. So it is very good to have even if you don't end up going for 5-pair iishanten.

Finally we have __ryankan pair__, {% mahjong 22466p %}. Standard riichi likes this shape since it's waiting on {% mahjong 2356p %} to form a pair and a group. Shouhai likes this shape too for the same reasons, but also because of the two pairs it contributes -- again, if you have this plus another pair, it's time to consider 5-pair iishanten.

### Yaku considerations

Obviously, every yaku is easier to get in shouhai than in standard riichi, so in your EV calculations expect scores to be higher than usual. (Though if you're calculating EV while playing shouhai you might benefit from touching grass.)

Some yaku get more benefit than others:

- __Chiitoitsu__: As discussed above there are many more routes to a 5-pair hand, and a 6-out tanki wait in shouhai is better than a 3-out tanki wait in standard riichi.
- __Pinfu__: In fact a taatsu wait in sticky iishanten is a ryanmen wait no matter what. If your sticky tile is {% mahjong 4p %}, then {% mahjong 2356p %} all complete a ryanmen; just place the joker in the correct spot. This also applies to extended taatsu waits. (Here {% mahjong 4p %} is still a tanki wait, so it won't count as a ryanmen wait.)
- __Sanshoku doujun__: You're looking to complete only 7 of the required 8 tiles for sanshoku, which is much easier to force, especially when one of them is your sticky tile in sticky iishanten.
- __Ittsu__: Likewise you only need 7 of the 8 required tiles for ittsu, and it's not the end of the world if all 4 of a tile have been thrown. This makes ittsu much easier to get.
- __Chanta/Junchan__: The hardest part here is often getting keeping a pair of terminal/honors. In shouhai a single terminal/honor can become your pair due to the joker tile, so feel free to pon away your real terminal/honor pair since you can get one with ease.
- __Sanankou__: If you have a triple shanpon wait like {% mahjong 11m55p88s %}, plus another triplet, that's actually all you need for sanankou, if you tsumo.
- __Yakuhai/Shousangen__: Although you can't pon with your invisible joker tile, you only need a yakuhai pair to make a triplet.
- __Iipekou__: No more waiting for the "correct" tile to complete this thing, your joker is always the correct tile.

Also all yakuman are much easier so definitely consider going for them more often.

### Defense

Furiten is still a thing in shouhai. If you got the above iishanten theory down, then you should have no trouble navigating furiten while playing, but how does this translate to analyzing others' plays for defense reasons?

Here I list the standard riichi strategies for defense and how they differ in shouhai.

- __Genbutsu__: Discarding a tile someone else has discarded is 100% safe against them. Always works, let's move on.
- __Suji__: Suji still works, but it's somewhat less effective. For starters, 5-pair iishanten is easier to achieve, and suji is useless against it. For 2-mentsu hands, suji is 100% effective against a ryanmen-ryanmen 2-mentsu, but since the opponent has to build 2 shapes, it's not as likely that both of them are ryanmen (compared to standard riichi, where you only have one shape so it better be good). For 3-mentsu hands it depends on the arrangement. Headless iishanten includes a simple shape that could be ryanmen, but you also have a tanki, so suji isn't very effective. Suji is useless against a ryankan iishanten. But for sticky iishanten, suji is incredible, because every wait of a sticky iishanten is technically a ryanmen wait, save the tanki wait on the sticky tile itself.
- __Early sotogawa__: The idea behind sotogawa is that if a player ends up waiting with {% mahjong 23m %} or {% mahjong 34m %} or {% mahjong 24m %} it's unlikely they would have dealt away {% mahjong 234m %} early, since those tiles all upgrade those shapes. Therefore if you do see {% mahjong 234m %} early, then {% mahjong 123m %} are much safer. This doesn't change in shouhai, I think, because shapes like {% mahjong 233m %} are indeed still strong early-game. Honestly early sotogawa might be one of the stronger defense strats in shouhai.
- __Kabe__: The main thing that changes in shouhai is that the joker tile can act as a 5th tile (provided the other 4 tiles are not in hand). So just because all four {% mahjong 3s %} have been cut doesn't make {% mahjong 2s %} much safer, as it can still be part of a nefarious taatsu wait with the joker acting as {% mahjong 3s %}. Also tanki waits are more common (every 3-mentsu iishanten contains at least one tanki wait), which kabe is useless against. So kabe is weaker in shouhai.
- __One-chance__: Absolutely weaker in shouhai. This is because in 2-mentsu you have two shapes that make up your wait instead of one. So it's basically twice the possibility that the one-chance tile will actually deal in. In addition, tanki and taatsu waits are more prevalent, which one-chance is helpless against.
- __Watching for tedashi__: This is important against open 3-mentsu hands. Since it's so easy to swap out the tanki or sticky tile it's easy to completely change your wait in 3-mentsu, so watching for tedashi is invaluable.
- __Terminal/honors__: These are actually more dangerous in shouhai due to headless iishanten, which features a tanki that can be easily changed to a terminal/honor tile. On top of this, 5-pair iishanten is easier to achieve, and have two tanki waits that can also be easily changed to terminal/honors. Honestly I feel like 2/8 is a bit safer than terminal/honors due to this.
- __Reading calls__: Given that certain yaku are much easier to achieve in shouhai, you will probably see some more obvious calls for things like chanta. I don't think there's much to see beyond that, though.
- __Mind games__: Given the increased mental processing power required for shouhai I don't really know if psyching your opponent out with weird discards works better (due to adding even more pressure) or worse (due to others not having the capacity to focus beyond their own hand).

### Closing

I have barely played shouhai and I pulled most of this theory out of my ass based on what I know about iishanten theory in standard riichi mahjong, so take everything I have said here with a large pinch of salt.
